The cascade is gonna cause you so
many, just heartaches and
problems and
all sorts of things like that.
And it can be really useful sometimes, and
it can be a big old pain
in the butt sometimes.
Something that I've been doing and
I haven't really been talking about,
most of the time, you don't wanna
style directly in a style tag.
I'm just showing that to you here so
that you can see the HTML and
the CSS literally right
next to each other.
Typically, you wanna do it like we saw it
in CodePen, where there's separate files.
You have style.css and index.HTML, and
your HTML file will link
to the style sheet.
You technically can't put style
tags directly in there and
then put little bits of CSS in there,
don't do that, almost never do that.
It's useful for this particular exercise
so that you can see these right next
to each other, but that's just for
learning, don't do that in your projects.
Okay, when we get to the project, I'll
really help you see that more concretely.
Okay, So
let's talk about the cascade.
What happens when you have two rules that
conflict with each other, which one wins?
It depends.
So this is called the cascade,
that's why it's cascading style sheets.
It defines a bunch of rules, of like
if two things conflict, which one wins?
So if you were just looking at this,
I have one h1 here, and
I have two rules that have
the same selector, .title and
.title, what color would you
expect cool title to be?
>> I'm thinking the red.
>> First one, Rustin.
>> It's a super valid intuition to have,
it's the other way though.
[LAUGH]
>> The one.
>> [LAUGH]
>> But I can totally see where you're
coming from, it's the last one to find,
the lowest down one on whatever you are.
So if you load five style sheets, right,
cuz you can load multiple CSS files,
it'll be the last one that wins,
so green, right?
If they have the same specificity, that's
a term that you'll hear thrown around.
If they're the same specificity, it'll
just be the last one that defines it wins.
So, Even if it's like this,
right, where both of them
are the same thing, right,
they're both classes, right,
it'll just go with the lower one.
And by all means, if I copy and
paste that one underneath here,
notice that now it's red.
So it's just the lowest one on the page.
So, I think that makes sense,
if they're the same specificity,
the lower one makes sense or
is the one that wins.
Maybe even to just drive it
home a little bit further.
Right, so now there's three of them
that are all the same specificity.
It doesn't matter, Okay?
Now, let's look at this one.
Look, I literally taught you that in the
next thing, so even if they're different,
it doesn't matter,
it's still the last one wins, right?
So green one here.
One thing to note though is it's not like
it's on a property by property basis,
right?
So notice main-brand-2 here
has something else, and
it's not overwritten in the second one.
This is gonna apply, right,
because nothing overrode it.
So it does have this black border here
that I got from that first class, right?
So it's gonna merge these things together,
rather than having one winning rule,
which is a useful thing, right?
Imagine if I had a light theme and
a dark theme for everything, right?
If it has the dark theme button,
only override parts of the colors and
everything like that, but the border,
the size, the positioning,
all that stuff stays the same,
we don't need to override it.
So just by adding that little bit, we
can kind of bring it along for the ride.
Does that make sense?
All right, so
now imagine that we have this, title and
main-brand, we just have two classes,
right?
This one has .main-brand-3.title.3,
so it has two classes together,
right, and
I have title-3 here with just one class.
Which one is more specific?
It's the first one,
cuz it has two classes, right?
So this is gonna end up being red
because this is more specific, Right?
And you can literally just count how
many class names there are, right?
You can even repeat it, right?
So if I actually come in here and
say, .title-3 again, right,
I just repeated the same class,
CSS doesn't care, right?
Now, they're both two specificity,
right, so
whatever the one is last on the page wins.
But if it only has one,
This is more specific,
the selector is more specific.
And what if I had a p here?
The class = title-3, some text.
Some text is green.
I feel like I'm choosing the worst colors,
if you're colorblind,
I'm very sorry about that,
that is not intentional.
This one ends up being blue, right,
because it doesn't match this one,
right, cuz it doesn't have this
main-brand-3 class, right?
It just has title-3, so
it ends up being blue.
So keep in mind,
all of the selectors have to match.
Does that makes sense?
Okay, how about this one?
I'm trying to set you up to fail here,
I'm doing that on purpose,
I'm trying to subvert expectations.
You have an h1, and you say,
all h1s will be colored green, right?
And you have a title-4 class here,
which is another h1, so
which one is more specific in this case?
>> Title four.
>> Title four, because classes
are more specific than tags.
An imperfect way of thinking about it is
thinking about the classes is in the tens
place and the tags are in the zero place,
right, or the one's place, right?
So, if I have five tag selectors, which
is actually technically not possible,
but don't think about that too much for
a second, or I have one class, right?
Obviously, the 10 is bigger than the 5.
Now, it's imperfect because even if you
have 254 tag selectors and one class,
the class is still more specific.
Basically, if you have a class selector,
it's always more specific
than a tag selector.
So classes are always more specific
than tags, that's the takeaway there.
So the class selector will overpower
a tag selector, it's more specific.
This is why I'm telling you to
do everything in classes so
that it's more obvious how the cascade's
gonna happen, because once you start
getting into niche use cases, it becomes
really strange of which one's gonna win.
So, here's a fun one for
you, what color is this h1 gonna be?
It's gonna be orange, It has two classes,
so you can think of that being 20,
right, in my shorthand.
This has a tag and a class,
so it'd be 11, and
this has one class, so it'd be 10.
So that's why this is orange.
If I delete this one,
which one do you think it's gonna be?
>> Red.
>> Red, right,
cuz it's a little bit more specific,
cuz it has the tag
selector in there as well.
Cool, good job.
This is almost all of
the CSS I want you to do,
is selecting very rarely,
sometimes by tag.
And again, in that specific case, where
you want literally all of them on your
website style that way, and
then all the rest of time doing classes.
And for the most part, if you can
stick to one class, that's ideal.
Sometimes a second kind of utility,
sometimes maybe a third utility.
If you're going beyond three classes,
you're getting a little too crazy for
my taste, and I think you should
kinda tone it down to one to three,
preferably one, because it keeps
your CSS very straightforward.
If you start relying on the cascade for
lots of stuff,
down the road, your CSS is gonna
end up being just bonkers.
And let me tell you specifically,
having worked at LinkedIn,
which had a two megabyte style sheet,
which is enormous by the way.
Most stylesheet should be what?
20 kilobytes,
I feel like that's a big stylesheet.
What is it on this website?
And now I'm afraid to look, but let's
just go look at how big my stylesheet is.
I'm there, CSS.
25, okay, and I'm including some other
stuff in there that's less important.
So this entire website is 25 kilobytes.
LinkedIn's was two megabytes,
which is absolutely bonkers, right?
It caused the site to be super slow,
we had a hard time deleting anything
because we delete one piece of the CSS and
it would cause weird cascades
into the rest of our code.
Keeping very simple and straightforward
CSS is difficult and requires discipline,
right, cuz you can see there's
a ton of flexibility in the system.
And so if you abuse it,
it's going to abuse you later.
So that's my advice,
keep your selectors simple,
rely on the cascade as little as possible.
Sometimes you end up just having to copy
and paste some of your styles sometimes,
that ends up being okay sometimes.
Okay, why do I say all of
this to you right now?
I'm about to show you, I've shown
you how to use hammer and nails,
I'm gonna show you how to use wrecking
balls with CSS that I hope you never use,
but you need to know them.